Ulyssess offload blog (#6814)
microsoft/DeepSpeed: blogs/ulysses-offload/README.md

# Ulysses-Offload: Democratizing Long Context LLM Training 

<img src="./media/image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:3.34583in"
alt="A screenshot of a computer Description automatically generated" />

Figure 1: Ulysses-Offload supports 16x longer sequence lengths at 55% 
Model FLOPs Utilization (MFU) than NVIDIA Megatron-SP and DeepSpeed Ulysses.

To cite and for more technical in depth of this release, please see 
our [arxiv report](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16978):

@article{yao2024ulysses,

title={ Training Ultra Long Context Language Model with Fully Pipelined
Distributed Transformer},

author={Jinghan Yao and Sam Ade Jacobs and Masahiro Tanaka and Olatunji
Ruwase and Aamir Shafi and Hari Subramoni and Dhabaleswar K. (DK) Panda
},

journal={https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16978},

year={2024}

}

## Introduction

In the rapidly evolving field of generative AI and scientific ML, the
ability to train large (language) models with ultra-long context
capabilities is becoming increasingly important. These models are
essential for a variety of complex tasks, ranging from understanding
lengthy documents to image and video generation to processing extensive

> sequences in computational biology. However, training such models

Reviewer: The use of `ranging` makes for an awkward reading. I think `such as` is more appropriate, as an example:

```such as understanding lengthy documents, generating images and videos, and processing extensive sequences in computational biology```

efficiently poses significant challenges due to the enormous GPU

> resources and memory required.

Reviewer: Could this be simplified to `... the enormous GPU memory required.

> Building on our previous project, DeepSpeed Ulysses, which focuses on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building on DeepSpeed Ulysses, our previous project, which focuses on
```

system optimizations for training extremely long sequence transformer
models, we are excited to present the Fully Pipelined Distributed
Transformer (FPDT), also known as Ulysses-Offload, in this release. FPDT
is an innovative, resource-efficient technique that offers comparable
benefits to DeepSpeed Ulysses and other previous long-context

> optimization methods, but with a modest hardware budget. FPDT makes

Reviewer: Let's make the comparison explicit by saying `lower` instead of `modest`

```suggestion
optimization methods, but with a lower hardware budget. FPDT makes
```

ultra long-context large language models (LLM) training and finetuning

> accessible to everyone, regardless of GPU resources. FPDT enables

Reviewer: Minor:  `regardless` seems too strong. 

```suggestion
accessible to everyone, including those with limited GPU resources. FPDT enables
```

training with context lengths of up to 2 million tokens using just 4
NVIDIA A100-40GB GPUs. FPDT supports 16x longer sequence lengths at 55% 
Model FLOPs Utilization (MFU) than NVIDIA Megatron-SP and DeepSpeed Ulysses
(see Figure 1). The next section highlights the key innovations of FPDT, 
and subsequent sections provide additional details on the design and 
usability of FPDT, followed by experimental results.

## Key Innovations

### 1. Fully Pipelined Distributed Transformer (FPDT)

The core innovation of our work is the Fully Pipelined Distributed
Transformer (FPDT). This approach leverages a pipelined sequence

> chunking, which allows for the training of LLMs with sequence lengths up

Reviewer: I find it awkward to read this phrase: `a pipelined sequence chunking`. Is there a way to simplify?

to 2 million tokens on just 4 A100-40GB GPUs. By breaking down the
sequence into manageable chunks and processing them in a pipelined
manner, FPDT significantly reduces the memory footprint while
maintaining high computational efficiency. This method ensures that the
GPUs are utilized effectively, even when dealing with extremely long
sequences.

### 2. Memory Optimization

One of the critical aspects of our approach is the comprehensive
analysis and optimization of the memory footprint during LLM training.
We target the reduction of redundant intermediate buffers in both the
forward and backward passes of the training process. By optimizing the
use of GPU and host CPU memory, we can train larger models with longer
sequences without running into GPU memory limitations. This optimization
is crucial for enabling the training of ultra-long context models on a
limited number of GPUs. It is worth noting that FPDT memory optimization

> is orthogonal and complementary to model- parameter-focused memory

Reviewer: It would be useful to say why this is orthogonal with something like FPDT optimizes memory footprint of sequence/activations while ZeRO/FSDP optimizes memory footprint of model parameters.

architecture like GPT and Llama. This flexibility ensures that our
approach can be easily integrated into various training workflows.
Additionally, FPDT is compatible with advanced memory optimization
techniques such as DeepSpeed ZeRO and PyTorch FSDP, further enhancing
its usability and performance.

## Core Design of Fully Pipelined Distributed Transformer

Figure 2 illustrates the core structure of FPDT. FPDT leverages multiple
memory hierarchies in modern GPU clusters, thus boosting hardware
efficiency and cost-effectiveness while achieving very high model FLOP
utilization (MFU). The design of FPDT centers around pipelining,
scheduling, and memory management. These well-known optimization
techniques are essential for scaling LLM context length to a million
scale with a few GPUs and will be discussed in the subsequent
subsections.

<img src="./media/image2.png" style="width:6.5in;height:2.68634in"
alt="A screenshot of a computer Description automatically generated" />

Figure 2: FPDT core design

### 

### Pipelining and Scheduling

FPDT employs a pipelined sequence chunking design to manage the memory
and computational load efficiently. In traditional Transformer model,

> input QKV tensor can be denoted *\[B, S, H, D\]*, where *B* is batch

Reviewer: I don't get the benefit of representing input sequence as quad-tuple with model hidden dimension split into `H` and `D`. I understand that this split matters for Ulyssess algorithm, but if we are claiming generality to other SP algorithms then our descriptions should remain generic.

> input QKV tensor can be denoted *\[B, S, H, D\]*, where *B* is batch

Author: QKV tensor => q, k, v (separate) tensors. Ulysses assumes input sequence/hidden state projected so q,k,v!

> input QKV tensor can be denoted *\[B, S, H, D\]*, where *B* is batch

Reviewer: The confusion is the overload of `input` since the general conversation is about sequences, which are also input. How about using `projected` instead of `input`? 

Also, does [B, S, H, D] denote a fused QKV tensor, or separate Q, K, V tensors`?

> input QKV tensor can be denoted *\[B, S, H, D\]*, where *B* is batch

Author: Separate

size, *S* is sequence length, *H* is number of heads and *D* is hidden
dimension per head. With sequence parallelism such as DeepSpeed Ulysses,
input tensor is partitioned along sequence dimension across sequence

> parallel group P, that is *\[B, S/P, H,D\]* prior to alltoall collective

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parallel group P, that is *\[B, S/P, H, D\]* prior to alltoall collective
```

communication. The alltoall communication gathers partitioned tensor
along sequence dimension and scatter them along head dimension essential

> transforming tensor from *\[B, S/P, H, D\]* to *\[B,S, H/P, D\]*. In our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transforming tensor from *\[B, S/P, H, D\]* to *\[B, S, H/P, D\]*. In our
```

FPDT design, we further subdivide per GPU *S/P* sequence into *u*
chunks. Thus, the input tensor is now represented as \[*B, S/uP, H,
D*\]. We denote these chunks as *T<sub>i</sub>*,
where$\ i\  \in \ 0,1,\ldots,\ u - 1.$ As shown in Figure 1,
*T<sub>i</sub>* is projected to query *q<sub>i</sub>*, key
*k<sub>i</sub>*, and value *v<sub>i</sub>*. Then, we perform the
alltoall communication among the sequence parallel group. In our chunk
design, the sequence length for each chunk is reduced by a factor of *u*
compared to Ulysses.

<img src="./media/image3.png" style="width:6.5in;height:5.36042in"
alt="A screenshot of a computer Description automatically generated" />

Figure 3: FDPT with Offload

Figure 3 gives an example of how to perform the computation of chunk
*T<sub>m</sub>*. After the alltoall collective communication,
*GPU<sub>j</sub>* receives
$\widehat{q}m,\ \widehat{k}m,\ and\ \widehat{v}m$*.* We then fetch the
previous sequence chunk by chunk from the host memory to
GPU<sub>j</sub>, and perform online attention with the current
$\widehat{q}m$ and update the output chunk accordingly. Note that, in a
strict manner, at any given time, only one set of chunks

> $\widehat{k}i,\ and\ \widehat{v}i\ $is placed on GPU's HBM, reducing the

Reviewer: This is not rendering correctly
<img width="722" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c18721d4-0ce7-4f89-843c-831e6ed0ac89">
